✨ Add tutorial: Using BioImage.IO models for image inference in Galaxy (#5919)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/imaging/tutorials/process-image-bioimageio/tutorial.md

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: Using BioImage.IO models for image analysis in Galaxy
zenodo_link: 'https://zenodo.org/record/6647674'
questions:
- How can I apply a pre-trained deep learning model to a biological image?
- How does the BioImage.IO format integrate with Galaxy?
- What kind of outputs are generated by the model?
objectives:
- Learn how to run a BioImage.IO model using Galaxy
- Understand how to format image inputs and model axes
- Interpret and download the model output
time_estimation: 30Mm
key_points:
- BioImage.IO models can be run in Galaxy using a dedicated tool
- Input image and model need to be compatible in size and axes
- Galaxy returns both the predicted image and its tensor as output
tags:
- bioimaging
- AI

contributors:
    authorship:
    - dianichj
---

# Introduction

Deep learning models are increasingly used in bioimage analysis to perform processing steps such as segmentation, classification, and restoration tasks {% cite Moen2019 %}. The [BioImage.IO](https://bioimage.io/#/) platform {% cite Wei2021 %} provides a standardized way to share and discover pre-trained models, making them accessible across tools and platforms.

> Each model in BioImage.IO is tailored for a specific biological task — for example, segmenting nuclei, detecting mitochondria, or identifying neuronal structures — and trained on specific imaging modalities such as electron or fluorescence microscopy {% cite vonChamier2021 GomezdeMariscal2021 %}.

Reviewer: Fix `ERROR INVALID CITATION`, I think the `cite` instruction only supports a single reference:
```suggestion
Each model in BioImage.IO is tailored for a specific biological task — for example, segmenting nuclei, detecting mitochondria, or identifying neuronal structures — and trained on specific imaging modalities such as electron or fluorescence microscopy (e.g., {% cite vonChamier2021 %}, {% cite GomezdeMariscal2021 %}).
```

> This tutorial will guide you through the process of applying one of these BioImage.IO models to an input image using Galaxy {% cite Afgan2018 %}. You will learn how to upload and configure the model, set the correct input parameters, and interpret the output files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial will guide you through the process of applying one of these BioImage.IO models to an input image using Galaxy ({% cite Afgan2018 %}). You will learn how to upload and configure the model, set the correct input parameters, and interpret the output files.
```

> ⚠️ Currently, only the following 11 PyTorch-based BioImage.IO models are compatible with the Galaxy tool *“Process image using a BioImage.IO model with PyTorch”*:

Reviewer: Was this a result of your testing? https://github.com/FAIR-imaging/galaxy-image-community/issues/26

In other words, is this info from after the latest changes by Anup? https://github.com/bgruening/galaxytools/pull/1580

I think it would be useful to add the version of the tool to that info, like `As of the tool version XXX` instead of `Currently`.

Also, I think the list is identical with the table below? In that case, maybe omit the list, and move the `⚠️...` disclaimer to right before the table.

|------------|------|------------------|------------------|------|
| PlatynereisEMnucleiSegmentationBoundaryModel | Nuclei segmentation | Electron microscopy | Platynereis | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?id=platynereisemnucleisegmentationboundarymodel) |
| PlatynereisEMcellsSegmentationBoundaryModel | Cell segmentation | Electron microscopy | Platynereis | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?id=platynereisemcellssegmentationboundarymodel) |
| livecellsegmentationboundarymodel | Live cell segmentation | Phase-contrast Microscopy | Various cell types | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?id=livecellsegmentationboundarymodel) |
| HyLFM-Net-stat | Light field reconstruction | Light field and Fluorescence light microscopy | Zebrafish | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?id=hylfm-net-stat) |
| 3DUNetArabidopsisApicalStemCells | Stem cell segmentation | Confocal / light sheet | Arabidopsis root | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?id=3dunetarabidopsisapicalstemcells) |
| CovidIFCellSegmentationBoundaryModel | Cell segmentation | Fluorescence light microscopy | Infected human cells | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?id=covidifcellsegmentationboundarymodel) |

> | nucleisegmentationboundarymodel | Nucleus segmentation | Fluorescence light microscopy| Generic / various | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?id=nucleisegmentationboundarymodel) |

Reviewer: For coherence with the formatting below, maybe:
```suggestion
| NucleiSegmentationBoundaryModel | Nucleus segmentation | Fluorescence light microscopy| Generic / various | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?id=nucleisegmentationboundarymodel) |
```
Maybe also put the `🧬` icon as a prefix in front of each model name, so the connection between these and the example below becomes visually immediate.

| HPANucleusSegmentation | Nucleus segmentation | Immunofluorescence | Human Protein Atlas | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?id=hpanucleussegmentation) |
| NeuronSegmentationInEM | Neuron segmentation | Electron microscopy | Brain tissue | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?id=neuronsegmentationinem) |
| HPACellSegmentationModel | Cell segmentation | Immunofluorescence | Human Protein Atlas | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?id=hpacellsegmentationmodel) |
| MitochondriaEMSegmentationBoundaryModel | Mitochondria segmentation | Electron microscopy | Human | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?id=mitochondriaemsegmentationboundarymodel) |

## Model-specific example

This example illustrates the type of information that is both useful for understanding the model’s biological context and necessary for using the Galaxy tool — specifically, the input axes and input size parameters.

<details>
<summary><strong>🧬 NucleiSegmentationBoundaryModel</strong></summary>

> This model segments nuclei in fluorescence microscopy images. It predicts boundary maps and foreground probabilities for nucleus segmentation, primarily in images stained with DAPI. The outputs are designed to be post-processed with methods such as Multicut or Watershed to achieve instance-level segmentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This model segments nuclei in fluorescence microscopy images. It predicts <em>boundary maps</em> and <em>foreground probabilities</em> for nucleus segmentation, primarily in images stained with DAPI. The outputs are designed to be post-processed with methods such as Multicut or Watershed to achieve instance-level segmentation (object-based segmentation).
```

- **Imaging modality**: Fluorescence microscopy  
- **Task**: Nucleus segmentation (boundary-aware)  

> - **Input axes**: `bcyx`  

Reviewer: What does the `b` axis stand for? Never saw that before.

Might also be worth adding a small explanation of `bcyx` to the text.

> - **Imaging modality**: Fluorescence microscopy  
> - **Task**: Nucleus segmentation (boundary-aware)  
> - **Input axes**: `bcyx`  
> - **Input size**: `256,256,1,1`  
> - **Model link**: [View on BioImage.IO](https://bioimage.io/#/r/ilastik/stardist_dsb_training_data)  
> - **Citation**: [10.5281/zenodo.5764893](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5764893)

Reviewer: Markdown is not supported inside `<details>` environment:
```suggestion
<ul>
<li><b>Imaging modality:</b> Fluorescence microscopy</li>
<li><b>Task:</b> Nucleus segmentation (boundary-aware)</li>
<li><b>Input axes:</b> <tt>bcyx</tt></li>
<li><b>Input size:</b> <tt>256,256,1,1</tt></li>
<li><b>Model link:</b> <a href="https://bioimage.io/#/r/ilastik/stardist_dsb_training_data">View on BioImage.IO</a></li>
<li><b>Citation:</b> <a href="https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5764893">10.5281/zenodo.5764893</a></li>
</ul>
```

</details>

> <tip-title> Where to find this information on BioImage.IO </tip-title>
>
> You can find similar details for other models directly on [BioImage.IO](https://bioimage.io) by viewing each model’s card. Look under the “inputs” section of the RDF file to find the required `axes` and `input size` values. These parameters are essential for running the model correctly in Galaxy.
>
{: .tip}

> <agenda-title></agenda-title>
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>

> {: .agenda}

Reviewer: I'm a bit confused why the ToC appears halfway into the document :) could be fine though

## Get data

> <hands-on-title> Data Upload </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial
>
> 2. Download the following image and import it into your Galaxy history.  
>    For the purpose of this tutorial, we will use one image to test only one of the 11 available models:
>
>    - [`test_image_nuclei.tif`](../../images/process-image-bioimageio/input_nucleisegboundarymodel.png)
>
>    If you are importing the image via URL:
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_via_link.md %}
>
>    If you are importing the image from the shared data library:

> >    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_from_data_library.md %}

Reviewer: There is something wrong with the formatting here:
<img width="847" alt="Bildschirmfoto 2025-04-02 um 14 27 12" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/eb6f29b4-4527-4ff7-ab49-a86c58d1c403" />

>
> 3. Rename the datasets appropriately if needed (e.g. `"BioImage.IO model"`, `"Test image"`)
>
> 4. Confirm the datatypes are correct (`pt` for the model, `tiff` or `png` for the image)
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_change_datatype.md datatype="datatypes" %}
>
> 5. Import the BioImage.IO model from the Galaxy file repository:
>
>    - Click on **Upload Data**
>    - Go to the **Choose remote files** tab
>    - Navigate to: `ML models` → `bioimaging-models`
>    - Select the desired model file (for this tutorial, choose `nucleisegmentationboundarymodel.pt`)
>    - Click **Import** to add it to your history
>
>    If you are importing the model from the shared data library:

> >    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_from_data_library.md %}

Reviewer: There is something wrong with the formatting here:
<img width="838" alt="Bildschirmfoto 2025-04-02 um 14 28 05" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8b4f1b09-5d62-4a42-a600-8b683d4d9055" />

{: .hands_on}

## Run the model on your image

> <hands-on-title> Run BioImage.IO model </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [Process image using a BioImage.IO model](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/bgruening/bioimage_inference/bioimage_inference/2.4.1+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"BioImage.IO model"*: `nucleisegmentationboundarymodel.pt`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Input image"*: `input_nucleisegboundarymodel.png`
>    - {% icon param-text %} *"Size of the input image"*: `256,256,1,1`
>    - {% icon param-select %} *"Axes of the input image"*: `bcyx`
>
>    > <comment-title>Axes and size</comment-title>
>    >
>    > You must enter the input size and axes that match the model. This information is provided in the model's RDF file on BioImage.IO.
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

The model will process the input image and generate two outputs:
- A predicted image (`.tif`)
- A predicted tensor matrix (`.npy`)

> Below is an example output from the NucleiSegmentationBoundaryModel.

Reviewer: To be consistent with the formatting above:
```suggestion
Below is an example output from the **🧬 NucleiSegmentationBoundaryModel:**
```

> ![Example output from nuclei segmentation model](../../images/process-image-bioimageio/output-nucleus-seg-model.png "Predicted output – Nucleus Segmentation")

Reviewer: Is this the TIF or the NPY, or both/neither? Please clarify.

Also, some interpretation of the result should be added here, since this was promised in the introduction :)
> You will learn how to upload and configure the model, set the correct input parameters, **and interpret the output files.**

> <question-title> Check your understanding </question-title>
>
> 1. Why do the image axes matter when using a model?
> 2. What happens if the image size does not match the model input?
>
> > <solution-title>Solutions</solution-title>
> >
> > 1. Because deep learning models are trained on specific image shapes and dimensions; mismatches will cause errors or wrong results.
> > 2. The model will fail to run or produce invalid output.
> >

> {: .solution}

Reviewer: There is something wrong with the formatting here:
<img width="919" alt="Bildschirmfoto 2025-04-02 um 14 31 44" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9da2fd64-99b1-4b9c-bcf4-ec7807c098b4" />

> > > 1. Because deep learning models are trained on specific image shapes and dimensions; mismatches will cause errors or wrong results.
> > > 2. The model will fail to run or produce invalid output.
> > >
> {: .solution}

Reviewer 2: and for this one it is just missing a `>` before the `{: .solution}`
```suggestion
> > 1. Because deep learning models are trained on specific image shapes and dimensions; mismatches will cause errors or wrong results.
> > 2. The model will fail to run or produce invalid output.
> >
> {: .solution}
```

- Input image and model need to be compatible in size and axes
- Galaxy returns both the predicted image and its tensor as output
tags:
- bioimaging
- AI
contributions:
  authorship:
    - dianichj
  editing:
    - kostrykin
---

Deep learning models are increasingly used in bioimage analysis to perform processing steps such as segmentation, classification, and restoration tasks (e.g., {% cite Moen2019 %}). The [BioImage.IO](https://bioimage.io/#/) platform ({% cite Wei2021 %}) provides a standardized way to share and discover pre-trained models, making them accessible across tools and platforms.

Each model in BioImage.IO is tailored for a specific biological task — for example, segmenting nuclei, detecting mitochondria, or identifying neuronal structures — and trained on specific imaging modalities such as electron or fluorescence microscopy (e.g., {% cite vonChamier2021 %}, {% cite GomezdeMariscal2021 %}).

This tutorial will guide you through the process of applying one of these BioImage.IO models to an input image using Galaxy ({% cite Afgan2018 %}). You will learn how to upload and configure the model, set the correct input parameters, and interpret the output files.

> ⚠️ As of the `tool version 2.4.1+galaxy1`, only the following 11 PyTorch-based BioImage.IO models are compatible with the Galaxy tool *“Process image using a BioImage.IO model with PyTorch”*:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+⚠️  As of the version {% tool [Process image using a BioImage.IO model](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/bgruening/bioimage_inference/bioimage_inference/2.4.1+galaxy1) %}, only the PyTorch-based BioImage.IO models listed in the section below are compatible with the Galaxy tool.
```

| 🧬 CovidIFCellSegmentationBoundaryModel | Cell segmentation | Fluorescence light microscopy | Infected human cells | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?tags=Covid&id=10.5281%2Fzenodo.5847355) |
| 🧬 NucleiSegmentationBoundaryModel| Nucleus segmentation | Fluorescence light microscopy| Generic / various | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?id=10.5281%2Fzenodo.5764892) |
| 🧬 HPANucleusSegmentation | Nucleus segmentation | Immunofluorescence | Human Protein Atlas | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?tags=HPA&id=10.5281%2Fzenodo.6200999) |
| 🧠 NeuronSegmentationInEM | Neuron segmentation | Electron microscopy | Brain tissue | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?id=10.5281%2Fzenodo.5817052) |
| 🧫 HPACellSegmentationModel | Cell segmentation | Immunofluorescence | Human Protein Atlas | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?tags=hpa&id=10.5281%2Fzenodo.6200635) |
| 🧪 MitochondriaEMSegmentationBoundaryModel | Mitochondria segmentation | Electron microscopy | Human | [View model](https://bioimage.io/#/?id=10.5281%2Fzenodo.5874841) |

## Model-specific example

> This example illustrates the type of information that is both useful for understanding the model’s biological context and necessary for using the Galaxy tool — specifically, the input axes and input size parameters.
> 
> 🧬 NucleiSegmentationBoundaryModel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+Here we illustrate the type of information that is both useful for understanding the model's biological context and necessary for using the Galaxy tool — specifically, the input axes and input size parameters.
 
+As an example, we consider the following model: **🧬 NucleiSegmentationBoundaryModel**
```

>
>    - Click on **Upload Data**
>    - Go to the **Choose remote files** tab
>    - Navigate to: `ML models` → `bioimaging-models`
>    - Select the desired model file (for this tutorial, choose `nucleisegmentationboundarymodel.pt`)
>    - Click **Import** to add it to your history
>
>    If you are importing the model from the shared data library:
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_from_data_library.md %}
>
{: .hands_on}

## Run the model on your image

> <hands-on-title> Run BioImage.IO model </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [Process image using a BioImage.IO model](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/bgruening/bioimage_inference/bioimage_inference/2.4.1+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"BioImage.IO model"*: `nucleisegmentationboundarymodel.pt`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Input image"*: `test_image_nuclei.png`
>    - {% icon param-text %} *"Size of the input image"*: `256,256,1,1`
>    - {% icon param-select %} *"Axes of the input image"*: `bcyx`
>
>    > <comment-title>Axes and size</comment-title>
>    >
>    > The input **axes** define the order of image dimensions expected by the model:

> >    > - `b`: batch

Reviewer: Can you add some extra info, what this is? Never heard of it.

>    > - `c`: channel

> >    > - `y`: height
> >    > - `x`: width

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    > - `y`: vertical axis
>    > - `x`: horizontal axis
```

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: Using BioImage.IO models for image analysis in Galaxy
zenodo_link: 'https://zenodo.org/record/6647674'
questions:
- How can I apply a pre-trained deep learning model to a biological image?
- How does the BioImage.IO format integrate with Galaxy?
- What kind of outputs are generated by the model?
objectives:
- Learn how to run a BioImage.IO model using Galaxy
- Understand how to format image inputs and model axes
- Interpret and download the model output

> time_estimation: 30Mm

Author: When I wrote "min" it sent me an error. @shiltemann Could you please let us know if this is okay? Thanks a lot <3!

Each model in BioImage.IO is tailored for a specific biological task — for example, segmenting nuclei, detecting mitochondria, or identifying neuronal structures — and trained on specific imaging modalities such as electron or fluorescence microscopy (e.g., {% cite vonChamier2021 %}, {% cite GomezdeMariscal2021 %}).

This tutorial will guide you through the process of applying one of these BioImage.IO models to an input image using Galaxy ({% cite Afgan2018 %}). You will learn how to upload and configure the model, set the correct input parameters, and interpret the output files.

+⚠️  As of the version {% tool [Process image using a BioImage.IO model](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/bgruening/bioimage_inference/bioimage_inference/2.4.1+galaxy1) %}, only the PyTorch-based BioImage.IO models listed in the section below are compatible with the Galaxy tool.

> <agenda-title></agenda-title>
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

> ## Available BioImage.IO models in Galaxy

Author: These are the models that will work with the tool. They are in a repository. The user can add it to their galaxy history directly by going to upload -> chose from repo etc.. As it is explained in the tutorial so far. About any updates, I wouldn't know, I think we have to ask Anup

> ## Available BioImage.IO models in Galaxy

Reviewer 3: yeah, sorry, it was more of a general question than a comment to this tutorial :)
@anuprulez @bgruening: Is the data library retrieving models from the repo or does someone need to manually get them periodically?

> ## Available BioImage.IO models in Galaxy

Reviewer 4: currently, these models need to be updated manually in the remote repo (Galaxy file uploader). I think it would be nice feature to automatically update the models once a newer version available

- **Imaging modality**: Fluorescence microscopy  
- **Task**: Nucleus segmentation (boundary-aware)  
- **Input axes**: `bcyx`  
- **Input size**: `256,256,1,1`  
- **Model link**: [View on BioImage.IO](https://bioimage.io/#/r/ilastik/stardist_dsb_training_data)  
- **Citation**: [10.5281/zenodo.5764893](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5764893)

> <tip-title> Where to find this information on BioImage.IO </tip-title>
>
> You can find similar details for other models directly on [BioImage.IO](https://bioimage.io) by viewing each model’s card. Look under the “inputs” section of the RDF file to find the required `axes` and `input size` values. These parameters are essential for running the model correctly in Galaxy.
>
{: .tip}

## Get data

> <hands-on-title> Data Upload </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial
>

> > 2. Download the following image and import it into your Galaxy history.  

Author: I like at it as it is because in other tutorials, these are 2 separate steps =).

>    For the purpose of this tutorial, we will use one image to test only one of the 11 available models:
>
>    - [`test_image_nuclei.tif`](../../images/process-image-bioimageio/input_nucleisegboundarymodel.png)
>
>    If you are importing the image via URL:
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_via_link.md %}
>
>    If you are importing the image from the shared data library:
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_from_data_library.md %}
>
> 3. Rename the datasets appropriately if needed (e.g. `"BioImage.IO model"`, `"Test image"`)
>
> 4. Confirm the datatypes are correct (`pt` for the model, `tiff` or `png` for the image)
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_change_datatype.md datatype="datatypes" %}
>
> 5. Import the BioImage.IO model from the Galaxy file repository:
>
>    - Click on **Upload Data**

> >    - Go to the **Choose remote files** tab

Reviewer: I think it's called `Choose from repository`?
```suggestion
>    - Go to the ** Choose from repository** tab
```
<img width="882" alt="Bildschirmfoto 2025-04-04 um 13 06 08" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/dc9aeacc-0d6a-4d62-acf5-be3f8a8850cb" />

Reviewer 5: Yes, we are pushing for this less technical wording now.

>    > - `b`: batch
>    > - `c`: channel
>    > - `y`: vertical axis
>    > - `x`: horizontal axis
>    >
>    > The **input size** must match that order.  
>    > For example: `256,256,1,1` = 256 px height (`y`), 256 px width (`x`), 1 channel (`c`), and 1 image (`b`).
>    >
>    > This information is provided in the model’s RDF file on [BioImage.IO](https://bioimage.io).
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

The model will process the input image and generate two outputs:
- A predicted image (`.tiff`)
- A predicted tensor matrix (`.npy`)

Below is a visual **example** based on the output generated by the **🧬 NucleiSegmentationBoundaryModel**.  
This is a **composite image** created for illustration purposes by combining multiple views side by side.

The actual output is a **TIFF file**, and both predicted images reside in the same TIFF file.  
👉 **See tip below** for how to properly visualise the output locally.

![Example of tiff output from nuclei segmentation model](../../images/process-image-bioimageio/output-nucleus-seg-model.png "Predicted output – Nucleus Segmentation")

> <tip-title> Visualising the output images</tip-title>
>

> > Galaxy provides a basic preview using its `.tiff` visualization tool. However, BioImage.IO models often produce tiff files with several predicted images residing in the same tiff file.

Reviewer: I think it's just sometimes, but I may have a wrong impression:
```suggestion
> Galaxy provides a basic preview using its `.tiff` visualization tool. However, BioImage.IO models sometimes produce tiff files with several predicted images residing in the same tiff file.
```

>
> To properly explore the results, it is recommended to click on the **visualize** icon in the output file, this will give you the option to display the dataset using the **Avivator tool**. 

> > ![Inspect output with Avivator](../../images/process-image-bioimageio/display-avivator.png "Visualize your Tiff output with Avivator in Galaxy")

Reviewer: The image is not loaded when testing the tutorial

Author: Will fix it soon. I will also add the test for the tiny workflow now that the tool output is fixed ;)!

{: .hands_on}

The model will process the input image and generate two outputs:

> - A predicted image (`.tiff`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Two predicted images (written in one TIFF file)
```
